---
layout: post
title: The Promise of AI
published: true
---



While visiting at the University of Edinburgh, I had the opportunity to attend a talk by Prof. Brian Cantwell Smith on his most recent book, __The Promise of AI__.

Like many of my tech-minded peers, I'm optimistic about A.I., and excited by the revolution brought about by advances in machine learning right now. Prof. Smith presented a contrarian viewpoint; he provided an overview of *kinds of intelligence*, the differences between the kind people have and AI has. He frames this with two ideas, **Reckoning** and **Judgement**, a line he draws to distinguish between AI and people. Right now, AI excels at Reckoning: calculated manipulations of data about the world. Smith establishes Judgement as a normative ideal to which humans should aspire, where *normative* means that it is worthwhile. 

Judgement is given every virtuous quality of human thought, distilled to a Platonic purity. For Prof. Smith, Judgement is dispassionate, deliberative, accountable to the world, and is aware of things as *objects* in the world, rather than representations of things in the world. Save an unknown work on-going right now, Smith is right. AI *does not* have such capabilities right now. Still, AI is incredibly powerful. Whatever we want to dub it, Reckoning is changing the world as we know it, automating tasks that have been day jobs for decades. What I found initially curious was Smith's call to action; we should off-load as much work as possible to AI, as soon as possible. In a political landscape fraught with concerns over jobs, this was a change of pace. Prof. Smith is not a philosopher without a technical background. He completed a PhD at MIT, and is cognizant of the power of modern machine learning. This thrust, however, is also his concern. Smith concluded his talk with a further call to action; let us not Human intelligence aspire to Machine Intelligence. Once, we found fascination in people who mastered chess. This was lost to the boundary of Machine Intelligence. Similarly, we have lost Go. We will lose all games with set rules. Poker involves uncertainty, and a massive sample space, but it too will fall with time.

What is yet to be in question is the ability to use Judgement. We offload more and more of the decisions of our life to AI; let us not lose sight of our ability to shape our lives. Every time we turn to Yelp, to Google to make a decision for ourselves, we undermine what we have left. These are trivial examples, but deciding whether to take a PhD is not. To attend University, which University to attend, these are not. There are companies which try to offload these tasks from students, through surveys and learning algorithms. We should not let them, until we are comfortable handing the torch of Judgement off to GAI.

Why should we be so defensive of our abilities? The question is striking, especially when it follows a push for machine learning to handle as much of our lives as we can. AI, with all of its Reckoning ability right now, is not aware of itself as an actor in the world. It is not existentially engaged with the world. AI is not accountable to anyone; it has no supervisor, besides the data it worships.

I must reiterate; I am not an AI skeptic. Machine learning is going to continue to change the way we interact with our world. Someday, possibly soon, we will be dealing with General Artificial Intelligence and the way it shakes the Earth. Until then, however, for a human to be their best, they must pursue the tools they need to be best informed in their world. For anyone who wishes to contribute to the ongoing Deep Learning revolution, Math and Computer Science are indispensable. Low-code tools exist for machine learning; no-one who uses them will ever be on the cutting edge. Likewise, the hunger to ask analytical questions is a key characteristic of any modern researcher. While the two are not orthogonal, I have found them to be distinct characteristics in many. Yet, every prominent researcher seems to have the skills for both in spades. I am walking the diagonal. I want to take part in the discussions of how we let AI shape our world, yet I want to bring the mathematical and computational chops required to bring those directives to life. These are the greatest ways for a human to foster they facilities of Judgement, our last holdout. When speaking in short, I communicate the message as follows: I am chasing (1, 1). Excellence along both axises.
